title: "The Leprechauns of Software Engineering" by Laurent Bossavit
blurb: An amazing little book about a deep but not widely recognized problem in software development: "How folklore turns into fact and what to do about it". Strongly recommended.
categories: Books

I'll let the author introduce
[the book](https://leanpub.com/leprechauns) himself:

> The software profession has a problem, widely recognized but which
> nobody seems willing to do anything about. You can think of this
> problem as a variant of the well known "telephone game", where some
> trivial rumor is repeated from one person to the next until it has
> become distorted beyond recognition and blown up out of all
> proportion.

> Unfortunately, the objects of this telephone game are generally
> considered cornerstone truths of the discipline, to the point that
> their acceptance now seems to hinder further progress.

[Bossavit](https://twitter.com/Morendil) researches the origin and the
facts behind some of these cornerstone beliefs such as the 10x
variation in productivity between developers and the famous
cost-of-change curve. What he finds isn't pretty: often, there are
hardly any facts.

Methodically, Bossavit follows reference after reference of the
publications making these widely believed claims. He shows examples of
"telephone game" where sources are misrepresented or exaggerated,
either through careless reading or through bending them into shape for
one's own theories.

For instance, in chapter seven, "Chapter 7: Who’s Afraid of The Big
Bad Waterfall?", Bossavit shows how the now infamous, rigid waterfall
development methodology is commonly attributed to the 1970 paper
"Managing the Development of Large Software Systems" by Winston Royce.
He shows how there are now two camps interpreting this paper quite
differently. Agile revisionists say Royce actually tried to show how
such a rigid process must fail and how an iterative and incremental
one is superior. Defenders of more structured approaches say Royce's
process was misrepresented and, while it uses a formal lifecycle
model, is not as inflexible as it's made out to be. The problem is,
according to Bossavit both camps are wrong. For starters, the term
"waterfall" does not appear once in Royce's paper. Also, Royce does
affirm that he considers the sequential waterfall model sound, but
only if iterative loops are added between certain phases.

This is one of those books where you could quote every other
paragraph. I was shocked by how dangerously misrepresented some
studies were in papers citing them, and gripped by Bossavit's
methodical deconstruction of the issues. Misleading graphs get a good
treatment: "You should cultivate a reflex of always asking this
question: what does one data point on this curve represent?".
Similarly, fishy statistics abound.

Every programmer ought to read this book to become aware of how shaky
the underpinnings of some central beliefs of our profession are. Of
course, one should not throw the baby out with the bathwater: a claim
can be true even if a particular paper supporting it is not solid.
Nevertheless, the book opened my eyes to an issue I wasn't really
aware of before. As Bossavit says: "But we have now reached the most
pressing problem in software engineering: low standards for research
publications." After reading his book, I must agree.

My former colleague [Jerven](https://twitter.com/jervenbolleman) made
me aware of this book, thanks!
["The Leprechauns of Software Engineering"](https://leanpub.com/leprechauns)
is available directly from the author via Leanpub, in DRM-free
formats.
